that does the opposite of what they were trying to do.
Yeah, and the Cherokee often want a truck doll to run their business, because the chalk dollar.
That's hilarious.
That's like having a Shabbos goi turned on and off, turn your switches on and off on Shabbat.
Much more transactional commercial folks. Uh, this…
Very cool.
Something like that. It's… yeah, they, they… They don't think transactionally well. The Choctaw have always done that, and I could go further into the Choctaw, but yeah.
Thank you so much for that story. Gil, please.
It's a wonderful story, Kevin, thank you. And the what does this decision make us is a question that's going to be resonating with me for a while, so thank you for that.
Um, it's a great example of how
how contextual this whole conversation is, because, you know, I would… I might assume something about Native American culture, but no, Cherokee different than Choctaw.
No, actually, within Cherokee, differences within, you know,
So, all of that situational.
Yeah, and Cherokee Nation is much more transactional than Eastern Band and Katua.
Yeah, and you say, but even within Cherokee Nation, there's going to be differences in the different formations that people have, and I'm struck that
If I were in conversation with that tribe, talking, you know, if I were you in that situation,
and asked…
Um, hey guys, what's going on? Haven't heard from you for a while, being curious about the process of the transaction. That would have been very unwelcome.
And not helpful.
Whereas in another setting, I'm at a SOCAP conference, you might ask that question to somebody.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, the fastest way to go slower with the tribe is to probe.
Great.
Mm-hmm. Probe how, what does that mean?
is to probe, you know, to say, hey, what's up?
You know, it's like, they've said they're going off to think about it.
Oh, okay, so you're saying, yeah, that will slow things down. I gotcha.
Right, like, you don't get welcome to the camp if you come into the camp.
Get visible. And then you wait, and you get invited when it's time to invite you. I mean, it's that kind of.
You know, drives me fucking crazy, but, you know, it's what you have to do.
Yeah. I had a friend years ago who, um, lived in…
I guess northwestern Maryland.
very rural northwestern Maryland.
And their family had been there for 20 years before they had a conversation with somebody, not on their front porch, but in their house.
Hmm.
20 years before they were invited in from the porch into the house.
Completely friendly, you know, friendly conversations on the porch, but that's where it was.
Until… something opened.
It's a whole new perspective on slow to warm up.
Um…
There we go. Mhm.
Yeah, thanks. Our senses of what is… our intimacy gradient is a way of expressing this, like, who would you invite into your bedroom, to your living room, onto your porch?
to your block party, that there's a series of concentric rings,
And each culture, and then within each person probably has different settings.
Great.
for, like, who gets to be where, and how… and what you…
what the framing is for that particular ring. Like, oh, in this ring, it's okay to talk about
This kind of stuff, but not okay, you know, further out. All those kinds of things. And then there are people who just, like,
Live their lives fully in public and have no rings, apparently.
Uh, Alex.
Hmm.
Thank you, very, very interesting. I wanted to… I was very, sort of, I resonated with a lot of what Louise said, not about the teaching side.
But about what things are, like… No insult intended.
that chances are, if I see you in another Zoom group.
I will not recognize any of you. Literally, your different entities, and in my mind.
it's a different set. I cannot recognize people. Uh, it's always a joke when going to the station, I go past neighbors and friends or whatever.
Because, like, they're out of context to where they're supposed to be. So… so the reason… so it's a different mentality brain.
But what, on the other side is, and a number of you have said it, is.
I don't know how many of you have this feeling.
I will not use anything or do anything, or travel in anything where I don't.
understand how it works. I know how cars work.
I know how jets work. I have looked through the manual of a 747 jet engine when I was 15.
Because I feel the need to know. I wouldn't get on a plane without knowing this. I wonder how many other people feel like that, because.
And that is the inner curiosity that some people have.
And, uh, maybe I'm… Like some people said, I've talked to everyone. I talk to everyone so much.
I have no… no barrier. I will ask them anything, and some people, especially in Britain, the British people, a lot of them are very reserved.
And, you know, not difficult to cross the barrier. You can ask about the weather, you can ask about.
anything not important. But as soon as you ask anything remotely personal, it's just like.
goes out of the window, and I kind of upset a lot of people, strangers, so that's okay.
Um, one of the things I found interesting in talking to young people.
And… but it's not just, you know, just happen to be young people in one company I was working in. When we're doing Brexit in Britain.
it was a big thing. Everybody was talking about it, took years to resolve.
And I was sitting at lunch with some young people, they're all like 22, 23, 24.
And I started talking about Brexit, you know, political, you know, being mean, sensitive, you know, go and.
And, to my surprise, they all turned round, the three of them, and said, we don't watch the news.
I said, but it's a big thing, don't you care?
No, so did you vote? No. We just don't care.
You know, so, like, they didn't say don't care.
we're just not interested. And that really profoundly shocked me, that there are people in this world.
that are like that, so incurious. Um, on the one point about Louise and the AIs, what I want to say was I'm one of those people.
Because of the faces and everything else, I never understand. You can tell me something.
you know, the teacher would tell me something, I could never understand it because my comprehension's not quite right, etc.
And, um, I was too embarrassed to ask clarifying questions, because eventually it got really annoying.
To the teacher. She'd answer the same question 3 times at different angles, and I still didn't get it.
But do you know what? Since ChatGPT came along?
Oh, fantastic. I asked the same question in different ways, and eventually I understand it.
And that is brilliant. And I wonder whether kids may actually benefit from that.
So, because you don't… you don't feel like being… you're not going to be dumb asking the same question to an AI 50 different times.
Um, but I just thought… I wonder whether that would improve things if you… if you have the teacher.
and the AI to support. the teaching. And… That's it, thank you.
Thanks, Alex, very much. You reminded me of a little historical nugget. A friend of Kevin and mine, Joe Gouldy, who's a digital historian, wrote a book called Roads to Power.
Which was about the first turnpikes in England.
And before they started putting in turnpikes in England, nobody knew the whole country. There was no map of the whole country.
You only knew the road to the next town.
And when you start getting roads, you start getting carriage rides, and when you have carriage rides is the first time you have strangers contained in a small space.
So you have to invent things like, oh, lovely weather outside.
That small talk is invented
Apparently, in that culture,
for the close confines of long travel in a carriage.
And it pervades cultures in all sorts of different ways, and probably showed up in other ways in other places, but it's cool.
Klaus, please.
Yeah, we have been… Or fueling individual curiosity, but there's also.
A commons persona, you know, as people, so Brexit is a great example. How was Brexit possible?
It's because there was… Uh, uh… a curiosity of the comments about what does this all imply and what does it mean.
And where should we be drifting, and where should we be going?
So the… looking at this not just from an individual perspective, but from a commons perspective, you know, from… from… Where the majority is moving, moving around, and maybe having groups within.
the Commons, who have divergent opinions. I mean, that's also… I mean, it's heavily cultural, but it's also… Um, uh, a way to define curiosity.
You know, to… because the… the… And I'm not quite sure how to really frame this, but… Um, the… the common mind is curious about and interested in information, and of course it's being manipulated and.
And messed around with. And the reason why I'm so, so maybe more aware of it is because.
Now I've been working on climate change, I've been working on.
Uh, getting people to understand food within the context of climate and environment.
And there is a shift in public perception. You know, you can see that opinion bending towards.
an understanding of health and of nutrition, and so on.
And the impact on environment. Um, but it's… it's, um… and I think the curiosity is there.
But you're fighting these, these… information streams that are contradicting each other, you know, and that are manipulated.
So how does that all play a role here? How does that… you know, enter the idea of what is curiosity. You know, if you can't distinguish between.
what's right and wrong, and not wanting to be misled, you know, having to have the trust.
To… to… towards an information source. And then… and then, uh, commit yourself to that information source versus.
you know, dismissing, you know, others. So I think there's a… there are a lot of nuances here that.
That are a little bit more difficult to define.
Absolutely, Klaus. You just opened up in my brain
sort of the QAnon and other conspiracy theorist comment of, I did… well, I did the research, or do your own research.
And people going off onto the intratubes.
And discovering God knows what. And this is sort of at that boundary between curiosity and critical thinking, but also misinformation, disinformation, etc., etc.
And strangely enough, collective sense-making, which is an incredibly OGM-y topic.
part of the reason we're here is how do we… how do we make sense of our world together?
Um, Scott, please.
As I am… want to do, I…
have an idea about…
a way to define curiosity, or one definition.
Hmm.
And Scott, your volume seems to be really low. If you can lean toward your mic or turn up the gain or something, but keep going.
Alright, um, well, we'll just talk a little louder for a minute.
Um…
Curiosity. Noticing things you don't…
didn't have to notice.
I'm gonna put that in the chat. I just want to see…
If that resonates with anyone.
I've been thinking about noticing, and that seems to fit.
What?
Well, curiosity. Noticing things you didn't have to notice.
Thank you. Pete, please.
I wanted to echo Alex's…
discussion of not going in things that you don't know how they work. Um, I'm not quite that
that extreme, but I certainly…
in a building, or in a city, or in a vehicle, or whatever, wherever I'm at,
I usually know a lot about the infrastructure of it, and…
And I feel a lot better about it because of that. Um…
And it's… it's just a way I live. It's not…
you know, it's… I don't feel like I'm super curious about things, or that I've got to find out stuff.
Although, demonstrably, kind of, I am compared to other people. Um…
Uh… and…
I… I, uh, I'm gonna put a link to a Washington Post article, um, and I'm not gonna archive
ph at, um, you'll have to do that yourself, but it's…
Washington Post found 47,000 conversations with ChatGPT that kind of spilled out onto the internet, and they've… they've collected them up and kind of went through them, so…
What do people talk with ChatGPT about?
And some of the… some of the things were just, like, heart-stoppingly… heartbreaking.
for me to read, because…
When I'm using a chat system, a ChatGPT or Cloud or whatever, I know how it works, I know
why it does what it does, how, you know, I can predict, you know, not entirely accurately, but I can kind of predict.
It's gonna be good at these things, it's gonna be bad at these things, it's going to pretend to be good at these things, and it's going to be wrong.
And that doesn't freak me out, you know? It's like writing in a… in a…
a jet airplane, and knowing
What kinds of things would break and are no big deal, and what kinds of things might seem like not a big deal, but they're huge, and, like, every… it's a disaster, right?
I know that kind of thing about jet airplanes, or cars, or buses, or, you know, uh…
tall buildings, or whatever.
Um, and so it…
it… kind of terrifies me, thinking that people are using these…
things that are able to ape human emotions effectively.
Um, with… with absolutely no intent or… or care about what they're doing, because they cannot have care, not because they don't, you know, they don't…
give a hoot. They can't.
Um, but they pretend that they do, or they act like they do, in a way that confuses people, and…
There's a bunch of people who don't know how, you know, AI works, and they get fooled by it, and they…
They do all kinds of crazy things with it.
This… it reminds me also, in a strange way, this… I'm going to say something that I feel like
is embarrassing to say in public. Um…
Uh, I am pretty successful at using
Don't do this at home, folks. I'm pretty successful at using ChatGPT as health advice. And I was thinking about that. I had a… I had a kind of a health scare. It ended up in the hospital for a few days. I spent a lot of time with ChatGPT.
Uh, asking stupid questions of it, rather than a nurse, because nurses are busy doing other
more important things, apparently. Um, uh, no offense to nurses or even the medical system, but ChatGPT was a huge help to me, and I'm like,
Okay, how can I tell people that I did this?
And I did it in a safe way.
Because, just like jet airplanes and, you know, excavators and tall buildings, I know a lot about health systems, too. Health systems and my health, and…
how… how medicine works, and I can understand an explanation from ChatGPT and ask
penetrating questions about, are you… are you sure that you thought about this or that, you know, in a way that I feel…
safe to navigate with ChatGPT,
giving me health advice. I wouldn't recommend that to most people, and again, don't do it at home.
Um, but, uh, it's, uh, it was shocking meeting the Washington Post thing, going, oh my god, people are using these technologies and have no clue how it works, and they're getting tricked by it. Um, not because the thing is trying to trick it,
Because they've… they're in a context where they don't have enough information about it.
Thanks.
Thanks, Pete. Louise?
Well, that's an interesting one for me to lead on to, because I do reflect on the use of AI.
Um, in an education environment. I can see there would be so many benefits. I mean, I'm fortunate to have small classes of, say, 24 students.
But you can imagine trying to give those 24 students individual focused attention is very challenging.
But if they have an AI bot that can respond to them.
Which can lead them, which can assess them, and move them on.
We have individual students moving at an individual pace.
And I can see a huge benefit in that, but you've, um, it's Pete.
has given me then a lot of that concern, you know, we've got to have some confidence that that, um, AI is capable of doing that, maybe in a focused, um.
on a focused topic or subject, you can have an AI that could lead students through a learning experience and let them.
Um, at their own pace, but also at their own level of curiosity, um, explore a subject.
Um, something the conversation has really highlighted for me, which is going to be beneficial when I'm teaching, is that this curiosity is so multifaceted.
that I may not recognize curiosity from a student about this particular maths lesson.
But they probably do have the curiosity in some area that's engrossing for them.
Um, and I may just not be aware of that. I mustn't judge them just in their… in the environment of curiosity in my classroom.
and maths, so that's been very helpful, um, today.
Um, one thing I might mention is if you are interested in Brexit, I don't know if you've seen the film, which I found very, um, enlightening, although I do appreciate.
It's sort of a docudrama, where, um, Benedict Cumberbutch plays Dominic Cummings.
And, um, it explores the ways that, um. They managed to influence and convince the public that 2X it was the vote.
So that's quite interesting to watch.
Thank you so much, Luis. Excuse me.
Oops, uh, John.
Okay, so…
one of the ideas about Curiosity was,
Noticing things that you don't absolutely have to notice.
You may notice that I'm in a different context than I was earlier in the call.
And, um, if you're curious…
I'm actually in a hyperbaric chamber, and we're just under 2 atmospheres
And about 46% oxygen.
Which is, um…
as nominally therapeutic benefits for both
Certainly conditions, certain disease conditions, but also…
you know, as both a longevity or a cognitive enhancement, um…
tools, and that's how I'm using it.
Um, and also to build on the comments about teaching,
I taught different levels, you know.
young kids, high school, college, and adults.
And, uh…
There are techniques which…
If you thought this was curiosity, you would be…
oversimplifying, on the one hand. On the other hand,
they're quite powerful, particularly if
You can, um…
alter the social meaning of it. So, a classic one that
all of us who have done any consulting, or even just people who are here. I mean, you've heard of the five whys things, where you just keep asking why.
water. And you basically take apart
each answer…
You don't accept it as, you know, that's not the… that's not the ultimate why, the other whys are underneath.
That's just an example of one kind of question. I actually
noticed in teaching that
It's possible to over-focus on why.
when you haven't done the previous work about what
And how? And how is a more neutral version of why?
Y assumes, you know, why… we tend to look for motivation. We tend to look for a human actor and a motivation.
And it's a good place to look, you know, if you're…
If you're in a mystery story, or if you're in a…
you know, stupid.
Murder mystery or other kind of mysteries, but…
There's other kinds of… kinds of collaborative coherence of, uh…
causes, and you might not notice those unless you said how instead of why. And also, if you said what?
First. And…
What about the fact that students, and I had… I had plenty of
militantly uncurious students.
first-gener… first generation college.
in a mill town,
Hmm.
you know, their ideal… their career goal was to become a shop teacher.
you know, they were… they were there…
When I started talking about communication, they said, well,
When are we going to laminate?
And they had pictures of motorcycles and things like this that they wanted to land. This is college. This is college.
But it was… it was a shock to me, but I found that if you created a context in which
There's a social reason
for participating and pursuing a question like the five whys. They'll participate for the social reason,
And then down the road, they'll get the benefit in terms of
the enrichment of the conversation and the possibility of
say, oh, we actually, uh…
discovered something that we weren't looking for, and we weren't particularly… if you'd told us
But look for it, we would not have necessarily done it, but we did it in the context of…
playing this little game, and as a result of playing the little game,
We now have a different perspective.
So… that's it.
Thank you, John.
Kevin?
Yeah, you know, this is going from, don't try this at home.
And sort of part of my approach to life or something.
About 25 years ago, I was in Rajasthan in a mogul fort.
And there was a Fakir who does, uh, you know, a random pattern to keep a cobra.
Um… from going at it. And I've been told just a few weeks before by a woman that I was hard to follow in dance, so I wanted to see how it would be with the cobra.
So I bought a… Little pipe thing, little tube, whatever those things are.
And, uh, got a little closer, and so the cobra focused on me, and it turned… I did my little funky thing, and within.
Less than 30 seconds, the Cobra had me figured out better than Sean McConnell's wife had.
But I plan my exit well. I knew what to do with my right hand and with my left leg, and just spin behind, and so that he was in the line of fire, and my kids are watching me, and it's like.
I didn't have to tell them, don't try this, because they'd seen me, you know, do something, um.
But it was a great time… the moment of being eye-to-eye with a cobra.
It's something I would do… And I don't regret doing.
But I'm glad they didn't think they needed to do it, so I'm really glad that my kids have not seen me as a role model.
This is a good, non-replicable parenting moment.
Thanks, Kevin.
Stacy. Stacy, you're ending up in the queue after people saying incredible things, so…
Good luck. Go ahead.
Thank you. Yeah, I just… I just wanted to say that.
Um, I think we're… there's a little bit of a blurry line.
between the noticing and the curious, and I just want to remind everybody, we are all curious.
So, just saying that. With the noticing, I do believe there are people that.
They just don't notice. And, like, they may not have the ability to notice, and so if you don't notice in the first place, you can't be curious.
Then there are people that notice. And they're not curious, and there's a difference there. So I just wanted to point that out.
Thanks, Stacey. And, and, and…
So much of all of this is about how we direct our attention, or how we mind our attention, or what we pay attention to.
However you want to phrase that.
And because only that will direct us to be curious and give us the avenue, as you just described.
We were very close to the end of our time together today, so I'm wondering if anybody has
Victoria, did we miss things? Would you rather us have a more solid framework? I haven't been able to track the Excalibra.
board very well, but I've…
Well, the scale draw has been growing.
And it can be opened
longer, so anybody who wants to continue the conversation there, that would be great.
It's always great to have the conversation going on.
I will say that…
Um, I ask here in the chat if anyone knew about the question.
formulation technique.
That is, uh, methodology that the right question institute launched some years ago.
I think we need to do something like that.
with a good focus question,
And start asking the questions first.
And then, like, playing with…
These questions…
Prioritize, and then decide what to do.
Because I love the conversation, I've learned a lot.
But I don't think we have really…
start to uncover half of…
what Curiosity is about.
Because we were explaining our hypothesis instead of asking questions.
Hmm, okay. Um, so the four rules for producing questions from…
the question formulation technique, I'll just read them into the room so that we're aware, because I think you're suggesting we use this?
Um, yeah, so the four…
So, if you are, uh, if you want some combat, some…
of the meeting could go like this, so just to practice.
Um, so the four rules for producing questions are
Ask as many questions as you can.
Do not stop to answer, judge, or discuss.
Write down every question exactly as stated,
And then change any statements into questions.
That's the process. Um, and it would be fun to experiment with that.
Victoria, have you… have you run any meetings or sessions where you've used this?
Uh, I was attending a seminar.
more or less, very informal, just like this.
Among people who were interested in learning about Greek mythology.
And the idea was that we raised the theme, and one person was preparing the theme for the next session.
And people would come with questions.
Nobody did, nobody asked, of course.
Until I suggested this,
And then…
We had so many questions, and we were able, like, to really
go in the direction we want it, because
We ended with those lids of, uh, questions, prioritize them, decide what to do with them,
Uh, some people were, like,
For example, I want to invest to go further, uh, research,
The…
The hero hearing…
uh… difference…
I want to go through this other path, so…
It's one decided
The next session, instead of having this, like,
standardized sessions.
Because they were the topics everybody talks about?
And it was really enriched in.
enricher for everybody.
So, maybe we can…
Use it at least once.
to uncover anything we can,
About curiosity, or about anything else that's not the…
The issue is not the theme, it's that we practice with this.
That maybe can bring something new to this…
Conversations.
Um, I like it. Uh, and I'm…
tempted to…
go back to the topic of curiosity, or just shift around? I don't know…
open to whatever anybody wants to suggest, but I think using this would be great.
I think my… the immediate question that comes to mind is,
At the end of this process, you have apparently a really long, great list of questions, then what do you do?
Now, the next steps, the question formulation technique does not end in the list of questions.
Right? Okay.
It ends when you decide to prioritize the questions,
And what to do with the first three questions that are in your list?
Awesome. Thank you.
Um, beautiful.
So I… let's you and I talk about that some more, so we can sort of set this up. Anybody else who's interested, let us know on the OGM list.
And, um…
We don't have Ken for a while, he's stepped away from conversations like this for a bit, so we don't have a poem.
from him at the end of the call, which is…
Sad for me. But, uh…
We'll be back in a week. So, thank you very much for a great call. That was… this was… this was…
a terrific exploration, really appreciate it.
Thank you all.
Wonderful, thank you.
Gabriele, welcome, thanks, nice to see you.
And Louise as well.
Thanks, thanks, thank you. Yeah, yeah, thank you, Jerry.
I had some good insights from that. Yeah, I'm really intrigued about this, um… Uh, asking questions, things.
So I'm going to breathe on something online. Or… how can I, um… Uh, you said that if… If I am interested, how can I… manifest those interest if you're going to do something about this.
The question formulating or, uh… Uh, in the future.
So you… yeah, you are not yet on the OGM Google group, the mailing list that we use, so Victoria gave…
Victoria gave me your email address. Is it okay if I add you to this… to the list?
No, I…
Sounds great. And then, so on that list is where we talk
Yeah, definitely, definitely.
That's… that's our conversational space, so…
Uh, that would be the place.
Yes.
Nice. Perfect.
Jerry? Jerry? Can you… can you put… can you put Victoria's, um, thing on the email?
the, um… I don't know what it's called, the Caledra of whatever.
I will add a link to the Excaladraw map
Bored.
to the email that I post when I posted this session online. That's a…
Great idea. Will do, Stacy, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Bye, everybody.
And Gabrielle, if you do… if you do write and post something, uh, post it also to the OGM mailing list so we can see it.
I'm sorry, I don't…
I think you said you were going to write or post something about your exploration. I invite you to share it with us on the OGM mailing list.
once I put you on the list.
Cool. Thanks. Thanks, everybody.
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks, everybody. Bye, all.
Appreciate it.